You're in this video we're going to look at function doc strings and notations So what are the strings.
Well we've seen how we can use the help function before Wrightwood can go help on some object X and
it will return some documentation if it's available for whatever X was and X and the function could
be a module could be a class.
And here we're going to focus on documents strings for functions but it applies as well to other things
like classes and modules and methods.
So we can document our functions to achieve the same result using something called a docstring a document
string and that's defined in Pepp 2:57 if you want to read up more about its.
Now if the first line in the function body is a string.
So it has to be the first line and it has to be a string not an assignment of a string to a variable
not a comment just a string by itself.
Then it will be interpreted as a documentation string.
It's going to be a string there's nothing special about doctrines that just strings.
For example we could do this.
Def my phunk A.
And then here's the string.
That's the first line of the function the function's body.
Right.
And it's just a string sitting there by itself.
So this is not a comment and this is why earlier on in the course I was trying to make a distinction
between comments and strings.
Strings are not comments but you can use them as comments essentially But there are special types of
comments.
First of all they get compiled into your code.
Right.
Kamens Denot.
But secondly they all use for documentation and in particular.
Now if you could help on my phunk here's what will get returned.
We'll have my phunk of a followed by the documentation string that we provided
so multiline strings are of course available we can do that using while multiline strings and this is
why you'll see if you look at Python code that has dot strings dot strings usually have triple delimiters
even if they are just on one line.
It's preferred to use trippled delimiters for your couple of reasons.
First one is that it's it's kind of more obvious that hey this is a documentation string.
I mean you should know it's a documentation string if it's the first you know string that just sits
kind of by itself.
You know as the first line.
But moreover what happens if that if you use trippled delimiters if later on you want to expand and
put multiple lines.
Then it's very easy to just start adding lines you don't have to change the delimiters so you don't
have to do it.
Just be aware that it works with anything I could put a single quote here.
I could put double quotes I could put trouble single quotes triple double quotes.
It will work just fine.
Of course if you want a multi-line string then you have to use the triple delimiters so well documented
strings stoned because they are still part of your code.
Where are they stored.
Well a function is an object.
Objects have properties functions in particular have this done the duck property.
And that's what will be used to store that documentation string.
The single line or multi-line.
So for example let's say we have this function here.
And you can see we've got a multi-line docstring right here.
Then when we look at the Dunder dock property of the fact function it will actually contain all multi-line
string it's just a string but it happens to be stored in this Dunder dock property.
And so external tools that are trying to maybe create documentation on your code by looking for dark
strings will go ahead and find those done the dock.
Same thing with the help write the help function does the same thing.
It just goes and looks for the documentation string if it exists for the function and if it does.
Well the first thing it does it just returns the function header and then it returns the documentation
string so that strings are just there that you.
So you can attach meta data essentially to your objects your functions and classes and modules and so
on.
We also have another way of adding documentation to all functions.
And this is by adding documentation that essentially or adding documentation to the parameters of the
function.
And this is defined by the way pepped thought 31 or 7 if you want to take a look at that.
Now there were enhancements made and we'll talk about that later when we get to Typepad thing.
So in general here's how you annotate your parameters.
You just take your regular parameter whatever it was a B could be positional parameters it could be
a star or you know a double Stockwell's.
It could be a key you know a keyword only parameter.
You can stall and rotate each one of those and it's done by putting a colon.
And if you want a space it's not necessary and then some expression to document the return value of
a function we use this minus greater than and then the expression.
Right.
So we don't use a call on there because the call on is used to indicate the end of the header of the
function.
So instead we use this sequence of characters here.
But let's look at an example that will be much simpler if we do that so if we have def of my funk.
Right so we were defining a function and it is a first parameter it's a positional parameter a.
And we're just going to put a string but remember this can be any expression doesn't have to be a string
could be something else and we'll see examples of that.
And then we have the second positional and then a string and then we have something that's going to
document the return of the function and we can say hey it's going to return a string and then we have
the body of the function itself.
So now when we call help of my.
It's going to tell us my funk a a string be a positive integer and returns a string.
So first of all the dumb The duck is actually empty.
There is no document string in this function.
So the dummy the dock is empty.
So these annotations don't get stored.
And Donald Duck that gets taught somewhere else and the help function just happens to collect the notations
and display them this way.
All the tools extol tools maybe that too.
Does that create documentation may actually you know split these out and maybe you'll have multiple
lines that will tell you hey the parameter a is a string from a to b is a positive integer.
The function returns a string.
So and whatever you put in there again this is method data.
It doesn't affect how your Python code runs.
It doesn't help it doesn't hinder it doesn't do anything other than just you know attach itself as method
data that can be used in any variety of ways.
The help function happens to use it this way.
External tools might use it for something else.
So I notations can be any expression I want to come back to that because it means that if it's any expression
while we can put in let's say a type.
Right.
So as TR We can put a string right and whatever we want in the string.
You can even do multiline strings if you want.
I know you can.
And then the return again I use the type as an example but you can also do things like this you can
say B is this object this literal right this list one two three.
That's perfectly fine as well.
This is just an expression.
And then when you look at your documentation it will show 1 2 3 In fact you can even call functions
in your own notation since the expressions.
Right.
So you could write something like this.
Def my phunk 8 code on string.
So that's the notation for a note that this does not restrict a to be a string.
This is just an add notation again on re-emphasise it doesn't change how your code runs or what Python
can or can't do.
And then the return our notation is a repeated.
That's a string plus.
So now we're starting to have an actual expression right with doing string concatenation here.
And what are we concatenating with we're calculating the max of X and Y and X was 3 and Y was 5 so that
Max is going to be 5.
So we get to get a repeated a repeated five times and indeed when we call helco of my funk that's exactly
what we get a repeated five times.
Now one word of caution here.
First of all this max of X Y gets evaluated.
When you remember when we look at default values we look at some kind of caveats of default values in
the last section.
There is a statement that creates the function and that runs when its first encountered.
Once the function is created it's created right.
Every time you call a function it doesn't recreate the function it already has.
So just like default values were calculated and evaluated when the function was defined.
So to our notation expressions which means that if later on in your code you change the values of x
and y then that maximum may change and it will affect how the function runs.
Because here the function body is re-evaluating the max of x and y.
Every time it runs.
However your notation will not be updated because it gets evaluated once when the function is defined.
So just a caveat there.
So what about default values start Stockwell's.
Well they can still be used as before.
So for example here's how you would do it.
You would have your parameter name.
Then you put in your notation.
So the parameter then the notation and then the default value you can also do it this way and you're
just using multi-line continuation.
So again a straight equals x y z so a equals x y z as I'm not saying that a has to be a string.
You could say a call on string equals 10.
I'd be perfectly fine.
Python doesn't care right.
The notation is just metadata doesn't affect the code.
Stuff can be documented as well.
This put the code on and then whatever you want from your documentation for your notation sending what
you know will be within the form and style Stockwell's.
Same deal works exactly the same way.
So where are notations stored while they are stored in the donder annotations property of the function.
Doc Strange remember was stored in the dumdum doc property.
Notations are stored in the dhanda notations property and that donder adaptations property is a dictionary.
It's not a string it's a dictionary where the keys are the parameter names and the only exception is
that for the return notation The key is specified automatically for us and just called return and then
the values of the notations.
So for example if we have this right.
So this is the notation for a notation for B and this is the notation for the return.
Then if we look at my func Dondre annotations will get a dictionary with a key right the parameter has
the parameter b his return for the return notation and then the values just for whatever this happen
to be.
So in this case this was a string.
This was a typo.
This was the type.
So where does Python used doc strings and annotations.
And I've repeated this before and I'm going to say it one more time.
It doesn't it's mainly used by external tools and modules like for example the help function can use
it but it doesn't affect your code right.
It doesn't change the way Python runs your code.
Not in any way.
Another example would be applications that generate documentation from your code like Spinx for example
is a pretty typical document generator for Python.
And it will run through your code and will look for all the documents strings and all the annotations
that you have and it's going to compile documentation for your code.
So that's why it's really useful and recommended to document stuff in your code because if you ever
want to write documentation Let's say you write you know a library of functions and classes that are
going to be used by somebody else.
Well you're going to need to tell them how to use it.
So what are you going to do.
You're going to fire up your word processor and start typing stuff in.
Yeah you can certainly do that.
You know maybe you're going to create a you know a little Web site that has you know the documentation
and edged himself format.
Yeah you can certainly do that too.
But why not just include the documentation directly in your code.
If you do that and you use a tool like sphinx for example it will generate a really good looking you
know template and documentation for your code and it will be readable list out the classes and the documentation
for the class and then underneath all of that you'll have the documentation for the different methods
and you'll have you know documentation for the different parameters of your methods and functions and
so on and all that is done automatically.
All you have to do is just do the annotations and the doc strings as you're writing your code.
So it's a good habit to form of actually putting those things in as you write your code not going back
later on you know and spending days and days filling in documentation which is very tedious and much
better done right away as you do.
And of course it doesn't affect your Python code right.
Nothing changes.
So it's entirely optional.
Now there is something else too which is an enhanced version of annotations and we'll take a look at
that in a later section and we're going to have a section on that just by itself because it's actually
a pretty broad topic called type hints that this is a recent development type Taipans came pretty late
on I think version 3.5 is where it started.
And there was some extra refinements in 3.6.
So it's really going to apply to just the later versions of Python.
But it allows us to do something more with the annotations so basically it's of building on the annotations
you saw how we could have an adaptation be actual type write like string or INT.
Well now if you really have that and you have a system in place that kind of standardizes how that is
done then external tools can use it.
It will still not affect how Python runs but external tools can use it to maybe do some type checking.
Remember in Python everything is dynamically typed.
That hasn't changed.
But you may want to sometimes have this static typing.
You know we can have it in python but at least you can try to check.
So if you say hey here's a function it needs a write the positional a.
And that's going to be an end if later on you say equals ABC.
Well depending how you wrote your code in your function it may fail if you pass that a string.
So you may want you know to know before you run the code that or wait a minute I'm supposed to be passing
an integer here not a string.
So you might get a warning in your id say.
Well I was expecting an integer you passed the string.
There's something wrong here.
It's still going to run right.
Nothing's going to change it's going to run.
But at least you'll get a warning.
So that's called type checking and we'll look at that in that section on typings in more detail.
For now just think of notation simply as meta data attached to the parameters and doc strings as just
you know documentation strings attached to the functions or method or class or whatever it is that you
document.
So let's take a look at some code and we'll do that in the next video.
So thanks for watching and I'll see you in a bit.